According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_science),

> Data science is an interdisciplinary field that uses scientific
> methods, processes, algorithms and systems to extract knowledge
> and insights from noisy, structured and unstructured data, and
> apply knowledge and actionable insights from data across a broad
> range of application domains.

This sounds very modern, but it's really only the label that is recent. Researchers such as [Apollonius](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollonius_of_Perga), [Hipparchus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hipparchus), and [Ptolemy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ptolemy), practiced data science about 2000 years ago.

The focus of interest of these early researchers was a topic that had kept humanity busy for quite a while already, all over the world: the motion of heavenly bodies. The main motivation was making predictions for the near future. The configuration of the stars and planets was widely believed to have an impact on human affairs (a belief we call astrology today), so knowing them in advance was of obvious interest. They had astronomical observations at their disposal, but numbers alone are not sufficient to make predictions. You also need a model for extrapolating the numbers to the future.

The tool that Apollonius, Hipparchus, Ptolemy, and probably others, developed and improved to near perfection was [epicycles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deferent_and_epicycle): a model for the orbit of a heavenly body consisting of a superposition of circles, with each circle's center moving along a bigger circle's circumference. Epicycles are similar in spirit to Fourier series. Any periodic orbit can be described as a superposition of circular motions. Given enough data, one can fit an epicycle model and make predictions. But since the epicycle model does not contain any physics, it doesn't come with any safeguards against mistakes. Epicycles can equally well describe real and completely unrealistic orbits, and therefore the quality of the data is very important.

Today's data science works much the same. Very general models, such as neural networks, are fitted to large datasets via [machine learning](Machine%20learning.md) techniques, and then used to make predictions. Again the models contain very few assumptions about underlying laws of nature. They are by design very general (see e.g this [visual proof](http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com/chap4.html) that neural networks can compute any function) in order to capture any kind of regularity in the input datasets. As for epicycles, data quality is important, which is why data scientist invest a significant effort into cleaning up the raw data they work on.

Aside from the obvious technological aspects and the associated change of scale in the size of datasets, the main improvement of today's data science on epicyle models for orbits is even more generality. Early astronomers had periodicity baked into their models from the start. Neural networks (and other models used in data science) could predict the motion of heavenly bodies with even less theoretical input. However, it is important to realize that every model imposes *some* a priori assumptions, even if, as in the case of neural networks, these assumptions are not fully understood and therefore not formalized. Seen in this light, the improvement of modern data science over epicycles is gradual rather than fundamental. It is also interesting to note that neural network research has (re-)discovered the benefits of more specialized models, as e.g. in [convolutional](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network) neural networks.

Adopting an historical perspective, data science turns out to mark the *beginning* of scientific disciplines rather than their refinement. It permits the very first step from raw observations to a description of regularities in the form of [empirical models](Empirical%20model.md). Connecting these regularities to more fundamental principles that are already known, or even discovering *new* fundamental principles as in the case of Newton's laws for celestial mechanics, can only happen afterwards, via the construction of [explanatory models](Explanatory%20model.md).

