Formalization is a process in which concepts and their relations are made more precise by the introduction of [formal systems](Formal%20system.md).

Formalization is widely applied in the construction of [scientific models](Scientific%20model.md), but its importance varies widely between scientific disciplines. The most heavily formalized discipline is physics, to the point that one could almost *define* physics as the study of nature using formalized models. Other disciplines are less attached to formalization, but more formalized models are generally considered superior to less formalized models, and in particular the special case of [quantification](Quantification.md) is almost universally seen as desirable in science today.

The prestige associated with formalized models creates the risk of [premature formalization](Premature%20formalization.md), i.e. the introduction of formal systems that do not faithfully implement the original model but leave the superficial impression of precision.

Even though formal systems are often presented as the central part of a scientific model, in particular in physics textbooks, the model is always more than its formal system(s). At the very least, each model has an informal part that describes how the formal expressions relate to observations. [Newton's laws of motion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newton%27s_laws_of_motion), for example, require a definition of concepts such as time and force in terms of observable properties to make a complete scientific model.

In the past, formalization was limited to simple formal systems that could be constructed and verified by humans without machine support. This was a laborious task that typically involved entire communities for many years. Formal systems in scientific models thus tended to be few, simple, and well examined. In the digital era, formalization happens, often without much thought, whenever a scientist writes a program to predict or process observations. Since computer programs are notoriously difficult to understand, if only due to the complexity of today's [software stacks](Software%20stack.md), we see the opposite phenomenon of numerous complex formal systems that are only superficially examined and verified.
