What characterizes [formal systems](Formal%20system.md) (as well as formal [languages](Formal%20language.md), methods, etc.) is the existence of a closed symbolic universe in which precise rules apply. Formal systems require no reference to a context for interpreting their rules or making judgments of any kind. The symbols that are processed by a formal systems are of course interpreted in some application context, but this happens outside of the formal universe.

Informal methods, in contrast, use less precise references and rules, whose exact interpretation is context-dependent. The words of a (human) language are a good example. They usually take different meanings in different contexts, but those meanings are nevertheless somehow related.

A computation, as defined e.g. by a Turing machine, is a perfectly closed formal system. The input symbols fully determine the output symbols. An algorithm, and its implementation as a computer program, are somewhat open in having an interface to the outside world, from which they accept input data. However, the format and computational semantics of the input data is defined by the formal system, not the outside world. The more input the program takes from the outside world, the more its output is shaped by the outside world, making the computation less formal. An extreme case is a [machine learning system](Machine%20learning.md), whose output is determined much more by the input data used in the training phase than by its formalized aspects (such as artificial neurons), which are intentionally chosen to constrain the output only weakly. This is why machine learning has been so successful in describing many aspects of the world, but it is also the reason why it creates very little [explanatory power](Explanatory%20model.md).

[Scientific models](Scientific%20model.md) are inherently context-dependent and therefore informal. Formal systems are tools for reasoning that are always embedded into a larger informal model that links the formal system's symbols to concepts about the physical world. However, only the formalized part of the model can make it [explanatory](Explanatory%20model.md).
