[Formalization](Formalization.md) comes with an aura of mathematical precision, which is not limited to the sciences. As a consequence, there has always been a tendency to use formal systems prematurely, i.e. without having verified that the formal system satisfies all the requirements of its role (scientific model, prediction machine, control system, etc.). Before computers, this was not much of a problem because developing and applying formal systems was very laborious. Today, writing a few lines of code is sufficient to create a formal system and use it in practice, without the critical examination that should have happened before.

One example, the use of bibliometry to measure the impact of scientific publication, is described in the article on [quantification](Quantification.md).  Premature quantification is a frequent special case of premature formalization, as is premature automation via computers. Another example I discuss elsewhere is the use of [static type systems](Static%20type%20systems.md) in a not yet fully understood application domain. [Human-computer interaction](Human-computer%20interaction.md) is a rich source of examples of premature formalization: rigid entry forms, unforgiving (and often incomprehensible) error handling, overly constraining [computational media](Computational%20media.md) for text and graphics, and many more. See the talk "[Programmable ink](Programmable%20ink.md)", which calls this the "tyranny of formalisms".

Premature formalization becomes dangerous when formal systems are used in a normative ("this is how the world ought to be") rather than descriptive ("this is how we think the world works") way. Most people living in the Western world have at some time encountered administrative forms (paper or Web) that they had to fill in but that were lacking some option or entry field that mattered for their case. Those are forms based on prematurely constructed formal systems, i.e. formal system that are insufficient to deal with the complexity of real life and yet are imposed on its users.

Today's [Web3](Web3.md) movement is particularly prone to premature formalization. The type of formal system that it focuses on is the [blockchain](Blockchain.md), in particular its fancier varieties that permit smart contracts and Digital Autonomous Organizations (DAOs). As its name suggests, a smart contract is intended to be a formalization of the legal concept of a contract, adapted for use by computers. However, legal contracts work very differently from a computer program. They are used in contexts where the possibility of non-respect, for various reasons, is always present and dealt with by various social institutions (courts etc.). Smart contracts, in contrast, are computer programs that are run under clear predefined conditions and change the state of the blockchain in a fully automated fashion. This can of course be a useful way to proceed, but it is in no way a faithful formalization of a legal contract. Some people in the Web3 movement are aware of this and think about the wise use of smart contracts as a new kind of tool. Others, however, see smart contracts as strictly superior replacements of traditional law, because of its perceived objectivity and reliability. The aura of mathematical precision strikes again.

Recommended reading:
 - [Formality Considered Harmful: Experiences, Emerging Themes, and Directions on the Use of Formal Representations in Interactive Systems](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1008716330212) (by FM Shipman and CC Marshall)

