A [talk/demo at StrangeLoop 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ifYuvgXZ108) by [Szymon Kaliski](https://szymonkaliski.com/) of [Ink&Switch](https://www.inkandswitch.com/) that explores two aspects of [human-computer interaction](Human-computer%20interaction.md): visual vs. symbolic, and [formal/rigid vs. informal/fuzzy](Formal%20vs.%20informal.md).

Visual interaction is one of the main missing pieces in today's scientific computing systems. We have tools for turning symbolic data into visual data (e.g. simple plotting or more elaborate data visualization tools), and also a few tools that permit interaction with the visual form, but nothing that goes in the other direction: from visual to symbolic. The talk shows two examples that illustrate this point very well: the derivative plot generated on the fly from a hand-sketched curve, and the computation of a correlation between two hand-sketched curves. Such tools are essential in constructing a [computational medium](Computational%20media.md) for science. And also completely absent from my own explorations (see [Leibniz](Leibniz.md)), mostly because of my lack of competence in this space, but also because days are still limited to 24 hours.

Visual representations are also great for working at a less formal level, as all the demos illustrate very nicely. For symbolic representations, the equivalent is the extraction of formal relations from plain language, a task that is addressed by some work on [language models](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_model). But so far, there is little work on supporting the transition from informal to formal. Most work on computing technology either stays exclusively in formal universes (logic, programming languages, ...) or emphasizes informal processing (machine learning, ...). Even little formalization aids would be of great benefit to scientists. I'd love to have a tool where I can sketch a plot and have the axes straightened (and then more cleanup...), as shown in one of the demos!

Finally, I love the expression "tyranny of formalisms" used a few times in this talk, referring to the fact to most of today's computational tools are examples of [premature formalization](Premature%20formalization.md), in particular in their user interfaces. I suspect this is because computers, being dynamical formal systems, attract people who love formalisms, and aren't aware of the fact that most people work differently.
