Quantification is a specific kind of [formalization](Formalization.md), and probably the kind most prominent in science. Quantification in scientific models goes hand in hand with measurement in observations. Together, quantification and measurement are often presented as the hallmark of science, as the turning point at which the exploration of a phenomenon becomes scientific (see e.g. the [Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantification_(science))).

Being a special kind of formalization, quantification can also happen [prematurely](Premature%20formalization.md), and in fact it often does. An example that academics are well familiar with is bibliometry. The informal concept of impact, applied to a study or to the publication(s) resulting from it, is easy to grasp and apply in evident situations. I doubt anyone would question my claim that [Albert Einstein's 1905 paper introducing special relativity](https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.19053221004) had more impact on our collective scientific knowledge than [my 1998 paper on elastic network models for proteins](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0134(19981115)33:3<417::AID-PROT10>3.0.CO;2-8) (which is probably the highest-impact publication I have so far). Formalizing this concept to the point of making impact a measurable magnitude is, however, a highly non-trivial matter. Such a magnitude allows to compare any paper to any other paper, impact-wise, which is not an obvious operation. Was Einstein's paper on relativity more or less impactful than his [contemporary paper on Brownian motion](https://doi.org/10.1002%2Fandp.19053220806)? That's not a question I'd be willing to answer. I have read and understood both papers and am quite familiar with the theories that were later developed on the basis of these two works. Both papers had a very high impact, but in very different respects and in different sub-fields of physics. How could I compare them?

The mismatch here is that, in mathematical terms, the concept of impact has only partial order (you can rank some works relative to each other, but not all), whereas numbers have total order (for any pair of non-equal numbers, one is larger than the other). Numbers also have other properties that are not obviously valid for scientific impact. For example, the average of a set of numbers is well-defined, but the same cannot be said about the average impact of Albert Einstein's publications.

Bibliometry took the approach of "any number is better than no number", putting the label "impact" on an easily measurable quantity for which some relation to impact can be justified: the number of citations to a paper in the later scientific literature. This principle of "better any number than no number" is perhaps the most frequent cause of premature quantification. It allows moving on with building superficially precise models and theories that however fail to describe the phenomenon that they were supposed to describe.
