The broad topic of this collection of essays is the changes that scientific research is undergoing as a consequence of, or in parallel to, the information technology revolution that started in the 1960s.

One important aspect, and my main focus, is the change in how [formal systems](Formal%20system.md) are used in [scientific models](Scientific%20model.md). Before computers, obtaining inferences from formal systems was laborious, and limited the size and complexity that formal systems could have. With automated computation, large and complex formal systems (typically called software) are easy to create and apply. However, it is impossible to evaluate all, or even all relevant, inferences one can draw from such systems, meaning that today's computational models are far less understood than their ancestors, and only superficially tested by confrontation with observations. Moreover, the current state of software technology makes it easier to build large and complex formal systems than small and simple ones. This is the ultimate cause of [computational irreproducibility](Computational%20reproducibility.md), a major ingredient of the [reproducibility crisis](Reproducibility%20crisis.md).

Another aspect of the information technology revolution is the new forms of organization and communication it enables for scientific research. In particular, they permit a level of transparency that was immediately recognized as desirable, leading to the [Open Science](Open%20Science.md) movement that is rapidly gaining momentum.

Of course, social changes are at least as important as communication technology in the emergence of Open Science. Many topics of research, e.g. health or climate, are of increasing social and political relevance. The preceding paradigm of science, which saw research as an industrial activity producing knowledge, is no longer appropriate. In the name of productivity optimization, it restricted participation in the process of doing science to a small number of experts, who alone decided which topics were worthy of study, and who alone could judge which practical consequences should be drawn from their findings. With trust in experts waning in parallel with trust in the governments that employ them, this leads to phenomena such as widespread climate change denial. Public policies can be science-based only of a much larger part of the population can participate in the collective learning process that we call science.

The two aspects I have outlined above create a new tension. Science cannot become more transparent and more accessible if it uses complex software as the main (or only) expression of its models. It is not enough for those models to be Open Source, they also have to be understandable and explorable. One of my personal research topics is how to encourage a return to simple and understandable formal systems, by using [specifications](Specification.md) written in a [digital scientific notation](Digital%20scientific%20notation.md) rather than software in the construction of scientific models.
