The construction, evaluation, and incremental improvement of models for observable phenomena is one of the main objectives of scientific research. From a birds' eye view, the constantly evolving output of science is a network of models plus metadata about these models: where they come from, which observations they explain, which observations they don't explain, etc.

Scientific models can be described or classified according to several criteria. An important one is the distinction between [empirical](Empirical%20model.md) or descriptive models on one hand and [explanatory](Explanatory%20model.md) models on the other hand. An empirical model summarizes observations and permits predictions, via interpolation or extrapolation, along a few well-defined parametric dimensions. For example, a mathematical function fitted to a time series permits predictions at different time points. An explanatory model describes observations as the outcome of a more fundamental process or mechanism. It is much more powerful than an empirical model, because it can be transferred (extrapolated) to a much wider set of systems, beyond varying well-defined parameters.

In the digital era, both empirical and explanatory models have acquired specific computational variants that would have been impractical before commodity computing. The new empirical models are those obtained by [machine learning](Machine%20learning.md) techniques, and the new explanatory models are the models underlying [simulations](Simulation.md). Some simulations are based on older models of the pre-digital era which have been scaled up to larger or more complex systems. This is the case for [molecular simulation](Molecular%20simulation.md), or for weather forecasting. Other simulations are based on new kinds of models that would lose interest if simplified to the point of being manageable without a computer. Examples are [cellular automata](Cellular%20automaton.md) or [agent-based models](Agent-based%20model.md).

Another criterion is the distinction between [informal and formal](Formal%20vs.%20informal.md) models. An informal model, which could for example be formulated in plain English, refers to concepts whose precise meaning depends on the context, and which are therefore malleable. A formal model, in contrast, refers to very precise and narrowly-defined concepts, often from mathematics and formal logic. These aren't distinct categories, however, and not even the extremes of a scale, as the commonly used term "semi-formal" might suggest. Most non-trivial scientific models are partly formalized, with the formalized aspects embedded into a wider informal description.

Computation, as defined e.g. by [Turing machines](Turing%20machine.md), is the pinnacle of the development of formal reasoning so far. Its roots are an intellectual current that started in 18th century Europe with the work of Leibniz and others and became mainstream in the late 19th and early 20th century. At that time, the idea that all of mathematics and then science should be formalized was very popular (see e.g. [Hilbert's problems](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert%27s_problems)), but became more nuanced after Gödel, Turing, and other showed that formal reasoning has inherent limitations.

Nevertheless, automated formal reasoning in the form of computation became an important technique in scientific research, and highly formalized models are still considered the most advanced ones, particularly in physics. However, formal models in science very frequently contain informal elements as well, even though they are often seen as weaknesses. The most frequent informal element is an undetermined parameter that must be fitted to observations, thus adapting the formal model to the specific context of a specific system.

In recent years, there has been a strong counter-current advocating informal models as superior to formal ones, though I have never seen this point of view stated in these terms. The counter-current I am referring to is [data science](Data%20science.md), and the superiority claim is best exemplified by a [2008 article in "Wired"](https://www.wired.com/2008/06/pb-theory/) entitled "The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete". And yet, the short history of data science also illustrates the opposite move towards more formalization, for example with neural networks that are more structured, e.g. multi-layer networks or convolutional networks.

